An advantage of this approach of deriving the cost function from maximum
likelihood is that it removes the burden of designing cost functions for each model.
Specifying a model p(y | x ) automatically determines a cost function log p(y | x ).
One recurring theme throughout neural network design is that the gradient of
the cost function must be large and predictable enough to serve as a good guide
for the learning algorithm. Functions that saturate (become very flat) undermine
this objective because they make the gradient become very small. In many cases
this happens because the activation functions used to produce the output of the
hidden units or the output units saturate. The negative log-likelihood helps to
avoid this problem for many models. Many output units involve an exp function
that can saturate when its argument is very negative. The log function in the
negative log-likelihood cost function undoes the exp of some output units. We will
discuss the interaction between the cost function and the choice of output unit in
section 6.2.2 .
One unusual property of the cross-entropy cost used to perform maximum
likelihood estimation is that it usually does not have a minimum value when applied
to the models commonly used in practice. For discrete output variables, most
models are parametrized in such a way that they cannot represent a probability
of zero or one, but can come arbitrarily close to doing so. Logistic regression
is an example of such a model. For real-valued output variables, if the model
179CHAPTER 6. DEEP FEEDFORWARD NETWORKS
can control the density of the output distribution (for example, by learning the
variance parameter of a Gaussian output distribution) then it becomes possible
to assign extremely high density to the correct training set outputs, resulting in
cross-entropy approaching negative infinity. Regularization techniques described
in chapter 7 provide several different ways of modifying the learning problem so
that the model cannot reap unlimited reward in this way.

cite Deeplearngin, p.179

